Partial derivatives of regular expressions are an elegant formalism introduced by Antimirov to define an algorithm
that generates, from regular expressions, equivalent non-deterministic finite automata (NFA) with a limited
number of states.

While Antimirov’s work addresses the classical problem of word recognition in regular languages, here we are
interested in runtime verification (RV) of simple properties expressible with regular expressions. In this context,
the words to be recognized are finite traces of monitorable events, which define the alphabet of the language, and
the corresponding NFA generated from the regular expression may have an intractable number of states.

This often occurs because the properties to be verified consist of sub-traces of mutually independent events,
which are allowed to interleave during the execution of the system under scrutiny (SUS). For this reason, regular
expressions used for RV are extended with the shuffle operator. Although regular languages are closed under
shuffle, the operator allows for more readable and compact specifications.

By exploiting partial derivatives, it is possible to follow a rewriting-based approach to RV, where only a single
partial derivative needs to be stored at each reduction step, instead of generating a finite automaton with an
intractable number of states.

This raises the question of the space complexity of the largest partial derivative that can be generated. While
the upper bound on the total number of generated partial derivatives has been shown to be linear in the size of
the initial regular expression, no results can be found in the literature regarding the size of the largest derivative.

In this paper, we investigate this problem with respect to two different metrics of regular expressions: their
height and their total number of nodes when considered as trees. In particular, we show that the height of the
largest partial derivative can increase by at most one, while the number of nodes of the largest partial derivative
is bounded by 𝑛^2, where 𝑛 is the number of nodes of the initial regular expression.

Surprisingly, these results still hold when regular expressions are extended with shuffle.
